---
layout: page
title: "Research Accomplishments"
---

# Research Accomplishments

A. Personal Statement
I am a computational biophysicist with 10+ years of experience in developing and applying molecular modeling tools to investigate fundamental biomolecular processes relevant in medicinal chemistry and biochemistry. During my PhD at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, I developed quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methods1 and machine learning-based force fields for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations targeted towards understanding photophysical processes in biology2. In my postdoctoral training at Dr. Alex Dickson’s laboratory at Michigan State University, I gained expertise in enhanced sampling MD simulation methods, which are essential tools to understand long timescale, rare events in biology (e.g., drug binding, protein folding, large scale conformational switch in protein, molecular transport through transmembrane protein etc.). I developed a robust enhanced sampling technique3 by integrating weighted ensemble (WE) MD method with Markov state models (MSM) to decipher pathways of underlying slow, pharmacologically relevant inhibitor (un)binding in soluble epoxide hydrolase and provided key insights for increasing ligand residence time4, a crucial determinant of pharmacokinetic efficacy. I have also applied WE simulations to explore long timescale membrane association dynamics of the PIKfyve kinase, otherwise inaccessible to conventional MD. 
My long-term objective is to establish an independent research lab that leverages state-of-the-art computational techniques to advance our understanding of pharmacological and biochemical mechanisms. To this end, I have recently started an independent position as a fixed-term Assistant Professor, where I am committed to foster interdisciplinary collaborations that integrate molecular simulations with experimental approaches in structural and molecular biology. I have collaborated with several experimentalists and applied methods such as WE, MSM, and unbiased MD to study molecular mechanisms, thermodynamics and kinetics in a wide range of biomolecular systems. Most recently, I have been working with Dr. Benjamin Orlando to investigate substrate transport pathways in the transmembrane protein CbrA from Pseudomonas species using long, unbiased MD simulations. I plan to further utilize my expertise in this project by applying enhanced sampling techniques to probe the energetics and mechanisms of molecular transport and signaling in CbrA. By integrating structural and biochemical results with those from molecular simulation, our ultimate goal is to provide a comprehensive understanding of the principles that allow CbrA to act as a transceptor that is central in Pseudomonas virulence and pathogenesis.

1.	Bose S, Chakrabarty S, Ghosh D. Electrostatic Origin of the Red Solvatochromic Shift of DFHBDI in RNA Spinach. J Phys Chem B. 2017 May 11;121(18):4790-4798. PubMed PMID: 28437617. 
2.	Bose S, Dhawan D, Nandi S, Sarkar RR, Ghosh D. Machine learning prediction of interaction energies in rigid water clusters. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2018 Sep 12;20(35):22987-22996. PubMed PMID: 30156235. 
3.	Bose S, Kilinc C, Dickson A. Markov State Models with Weighted Ensemble Simulation: How to Eliminate the Trajectory Merging Bias. J Chem Theory Comput. 2025 Feb 25;21(4):1805-1816. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC11866749. 
4.	Bose S, Lotz SD, Deb I, Shuck M, Lee KSS, Dickson A. How Robust Is the Ligand Binding Transition State? J Am Chem Soc. 2023 Nov 22;145(46):25318-25331. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC11059145. 
B. Positions, Scientific Appointments and Honors
Positions and Scientific Appointments
2024 - present	Fixed Term Assistant Professor, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
2021 - 2024	Postdoctoral Research Associate, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
2017 - 2020	CSIR-Senior Research Fellow & PhD fellow, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India
2014 - 2017	CSIR-Junior Research Fellow, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India
Honors
2017	Physical and Materials Chemistry Division Day poster award, National Chemical Laboratory, India
2014	National Eligibility Test (NET) PhD fellowship award in Chemistry, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India
2014	Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering PhD fellowship award, National Coordination Board-GATE, India

C. Contributions to Science

1.	Development of Methods to Study Rare Events & Applications in Pharmacologically Relevant Biomolecules:
Modeling rare but biologically significant events, such as ligand unbinding or long timescale protein conformational changes, is essential for understanding the fundamentals of biochemistry. Traditional molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are unable to capture these long timescale processes due to computational expenses. My research has contributed to the development and application of enhanced sampling techniques that overcome this limitation, enabling the detailed study of rare events with pharmacological relevance. I have employed the weighted ensemble (WE) based methods to investigate the unbinding mechanisms of several inhibitors targeting the soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) enzymea. These inhibitors span a wide range of experimentally measured residence time, a pharmacokinetic property directly related to drug efficacy. By capturing statistically meaningful ensembles of unbinding pathways, we characterized the transition state ensembles (TSEs) for each ligand, revealing that structurally similar bound states can give rise to surprisingly diverse TSEs. These results underscore the complexity of computational drug design and highlight the importance of simulating transition state directly rather than relying solely on static structures or thermodynamic endpoints. We also show that even though standalone WE methods provide reasonable mechanistic insights of the rare events, they are not quantitatively accurate in describing the underlying slow kinetics, which are crucial in the paradigm of kinetics-driven drug discovery. In a subsequent study, we propose that combining Markov state models (MSMs) with WE methods would increase the statistical significance of the kinetic predictions. However, this is not straightforward as we identify the methodological challenges of integrating MSMs with WE simulation data. To circumvent that, we build an analytical framework for building WE-MSMs. Our method is applied to a long time-scale process of inhibitor unbinding from sEH, where we observe a significant improvement (> order of magnitude) in accuracy and robustness compared to standalone WE or MSM methodsb. Collectively, my contributions have advanced computational methods to study rare, long-timescale events in biologically and pharmacologically important systems. These tools not only enhance our mechanistic understanding but also provide predictive power to aid in the rational design of more effective therapeutics.

a.	Bose S, Lotz SD, Deb I, Shuck M, Lee KSS, Dickson A. How Robust Is the Ligand Binding Transition State? J Am Chem Soc. 2023 Nov 22;145(46):25318-25331. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC11059145. 

b.	Bose S, Kilinc C, Dickson A. Markov State Models with Weighted Ensemble Simulation: How to Eliminate the Trajectory Merging Bias. J Chem Theory Comput. 2025 Feb 25;21(4):1805-1816. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC11866749. 

2.	Polarizable Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics method to Explain Spectral Shift in Green Fluorescent Protein Variants: 
Fluorescent proteins and their synthetic analogs are indispensable tools in biomedical imaging and molecular diagnostics. A quantitative understanding of how the local environment modulates the spectral properties of these chromophores is essential for rational probe design. My research has focused on using polarizable hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methods to dissect and predict environment-induced spectral shifts in chromophores, particularly those derived from green fluorescent protein (GFP). I employed a polarizable QM/MM framework using the effective fragment potential (EFP) method to investigate the solvatochromic behavior of the GFP chromophore variant in watera. While vertical excitation energies (VEE) exhibited minimal solvent-induced shifts (∼0.1 eV), the vertical detachment energies (VDE) showed a pronounced red shift. This validates a long-standing hypothesis regarding GFP chromophores that states the possibility of significant charge reorganization during ionization. In a subsequent study, I integrated QM/MM with molecular dynamics to simulate and characterize the absorption spectra of the GFP chromophore variant in the RNA Spinach aptamerb. The red shift in the absorption spectra in the complex RNA Spinach environment is replicated by our hybrid method. Interestingly, contrary to prior assumptions that π-stacking interactions between chromophore and nucleobases were driving the red shift, our simulations showed that long-range electrostatics between the chromophore and the negatively charged RNA scaffold played the dominant role in the spectral shift. Furthermore, we uncovered an interplay between opposing electrostatic influences: the RNA backbone and surrounding polarized water molecules exerted partially cancelling effects, which together shaped the observed spectral shift of the chromophore. These findings emphasized the complex heterogeneity of biomolecular environments and their nontrivial influence on chromophore photophysics, suggesting that such systems should be carefully modelled in computational studies. Together, these contributions establish the utility of polarizable QM/MM models for interpreting and predicting environment-induced spectral changes in fluorescent chromophores. By rigorously decomposing the role of solvent and RNA environment, my work provides both mechanistic insight and a pathway for designing more sensitive and tunable optical probes in complex biological settings.

a.	Bose S, Chakrabarty S, Ghosh D. Effect of Solvation on Electron Detachment and Excitation Energies of a Green Fluorescent Protein Chromophore Variant. J Phys Chem B. 2016 May 19;120(19):4410-20. PubMed PMID: 27116477. 

b.	Bose S, Chakrabarty S, Ghosh D. Electrostatic Origin of the Red Solvatochromic Shift of DFHBDI in RNA Spinach. J Phys Chem B. 2017 May 11;121(18):4790-4798. PubMed PMID: 28437617. 

3.	Biased Sampling Algorithms to Accelerate Prediction of Spectral Properties by Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics Methods: 
Accurate prediction of spectral properties such as ionization energies (IEs) and electron affinities (EAs) in complex biological environments requires extensive sampling due to the dynamic effect of solvation towards the chromophore structural ensemble. Traditional quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approaches are often prohibitively expensive in this context, as one would require thousands of calculations to predict properties such as spectral peak maxima and full width at half maxima. My research has focused on addressing this computational bottleneck through the development of a solute-solvent interaction energy driven descriptor, which can be implemented as the reaction coordinate in a significantly fast sampling of critical snapshots in the context of a spectral shapea. This biased sampling significantly accelerate convergence of spectral properties maintaining high accuracy, without explicit QM/MM calculation at each configuration. This approach has been validated across multiple systems, e.g., phenol, thymine, and the green fluorescent protein chromophore in condensed phase, with consistent acceleration in predicting ionization energies and spectral widths. In a subsequent collaborative study focused on a much larger and complex guanine nucleotide in water, a high-level QM/MM framework was utilized combining the effective fragment potential (EFP) as MM method with the equation-of-motion coupled-cluster technique for ionization potentials (EOM-IP-CCSD) as QM method. The computationally expensive QM and EFP methods obliged us to use minimal sampling of critical snapshots. However, even with a handful of expensive QM/MM calculations, we recovered the vertical ionization energies and spectral properties with accuracy using the biased sampling techniqueb. Overall, these contributions advance the computational toolkit for simulating spectral properties of photo-physically relevant biomolecules. By reducing the sampling burden while maintaining quantitative accuracy, these methods facilitate broader and more detailed studies of light–matter interactions in biomolecular environments, an essential component for understanding radiation-induced DNA damage and photochemical reactivity in biology.

a.	Bose S, Ghosh D. An interaction energy driven biased sampling technique: A faster route to ionization spectra in condensed phase. J Comput Chem. 2017 Oct 5;38(26):2248-2257. PubMed PMID: 28762244. 

b.	Chakraborty R†, Bose S†, Ghosh D. Effect of solvation on the ionization of guanine nucleotide: A hybrid QM/EFP study. J Comput Chem. 2017 Nov 5;38(29):2528-2537. PubMed PMID: 28856705. † equal contribution to the work 

4.	Machine Learning-based Force Field Development of Water and Implementation in Monte Carlo Simulation:
Accurate and efficient estimation of interatomic interaction energies is foundational to the success of molecular simulations. Classical force fields offer computational speed but often sacrifice accuracy due to simplified empirical functional forms. Conversely, quantum mechanical (QM) methods provide high precision but are prohibitively expensive for large systems. My research addresses this trade-off by developing machine learning (ML)-based force fields that combine the accuracy of QM with the efficiency of classical approaches, particularly for modeling water, a fundamental yet notoriously challenging system due to its strong polarization effects. I explored the use of support vector regression (SVR) as an alternative to neural network-based methods. By integrating SVR with the many-body expansion (MBE) framework, we achieved highly accurate predictions of interaction energies for water clusters. For water decamer, the method achieved less than 2% ML error relative to the parent QM calculations in absolute interatomic interaction energy prediction and showed transferability across different temperaturesa. To validate the model’s applicability in real-world simulations, we subsequently implemented it in Monte Carlo (MC) simulations and compared the resulting ensemble properties to those derived from ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) and the classical TIP3P water model. The machine learning-based Monte Carlo (MLMC) simulations reproduced key structural metrics such as radial distribution functions, tetrahedral order parameters, and hydrogen bonding patterns with remarkable fidelity to AIMD, whereas the classical model showed noticeable deviationsb. These studies collectively represent a significant advance in the development of next-generation force fields. By leveraging ML methods within a physically grounded framework like MBE, and successfully deploying them in simulation protocols such as MC, my work has demonstrated a pathway toward highly accurate, scalable, and computationally tractable modeling of complex molecular systems.

a.	Bose S, Dhawan D, Nandi S, Sarkar RR, Ghosh D. Machine learning prediction of interaction energies in rigid water clusters. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2018 Sep 12;20(35):22987-22996. PubMed PMID: 30156235. 

b.	Bose S, Chakrabarty S, Ghosh D. Support Vector Regression-Based Monte Carlo Simulation of Flexible Water Clusters. ACS Omega. 2020 Apr 7;5(13):7065-7073. PubMed Central PMCID: PMC7143414. 

Complete List of Published Work in MyBibliography:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/myncbi/samik.bose.1/bibliography/public/
